 Job description Anaesthetic technicians are involved with all aspects of the delivery of a patient's perioperative anaesthetic care, taking into account the patients' religious and cultural beliefs and respecting their right to medical privacy and dignity at all times.  Prior to anaesthesia Drug ampoules contain small amounts of medications. Anaesthetic technicians prepare equipment needed for the patient to safely undergo anaesthesia. This involves: checking and setting up the anaesthetic machine preparing intravenous drugs preparing intravenous therapy administration equipment preparing a range of devices to maintain the patient's airway (e.g. laryngeal masks, endotracheal tube) communicating with the patient when they arrive into the operating theatre, verifying the pre-operative checklist for allergies, informed consent and past medical history. applying anaesthetic monitoring to help assess the patients' condition whilst under anaesthesia. This may include electrocardiography (ECG), blood pressure and oxygen saturation devices. The monitoring of other parameters such as anaesthesia depth monitors (EEG, bispectral index etc.) may also be necessary.  During anaesthesia The anaesthetic technicians role includes assisting with: inducing and maintaining adequate anaesthesia establishing and securing an airway making sure that patients are positioned in such a way NOT to cause discomfort during their procedure monitoring patients' vital signs and anaesthesia depth temperature monitoring and regulation collection and analysis of patient (blood) samples acquiring transfusion fluids and equipment  After anaesthesia Anaesthetic technicians assist the anaesthetist with: waking the patient removing airway devices transferring the patient to the Post Anaesthesia Care Unit (PACU) handing over patient information to the PACU staff  Other activities Regional variations exist, but anaesthetic technicians may also be involved with: Intra-operative intra-aortic balloon pump setup, operating and monitoring Swan-Ganz pulmonary artery catheter insertion and monitoring Intra-operative blood salvage setup, operating and monitoring Arterial blood gas analysis, including maintenance of analysers Arterial line insertion and monitoring Peripheral IV line insertion Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Central IV lines TEG Sampling  Anaesthetic Technicians in  New Zealand Anaesthetic Technicians work as a member of a multi-disciplinary team that includes doctors, nurses and support workers. The New Zealand Anaesthetic Technicians Society currently hold a voluntary register of members.  Registration Anaesthetic technicians have been accepted as needing registration as a profession under the Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act 2003 . This group are in the final stages of sourcing a regulatory body. Regulation is an important step in the future growth of this group within New Zealand healthcare and will mirror recent changes within the United Kingdom NHS regarding similarly trained personnel obtaining registration with the Health Professions Council.  Qualification After a recent review and restructuring of the existing qualification for anaesthetic technicians in New Zealand, a Diploma of Applied Science (Anaesthetic Technology)  is now the national base qualification. This is studied for through Auckland University of Technology. Other (international) qualifications may also be acceptable for working as an Anaesthetic Technician in New Zealand. The amount of practical clinical hours required are laid out by the Australia & New Zealand College of Anaesthetists, professional document PS8.  Anaesthetic Technicians in  Australia  Registration Currently, there is no compulsory regulatory body that exists in Australia to standardise the qualification necessary to work as an Assistant in Anaesthesia. The Australasian Society of Paramedical Officers (ASAPO) was hence created to try and standardise the profession by way of a voluntary registration process. Members are currently working toward and lobbying both levels of government for a compulsory registration process, to be regulated by an official government body.  Health training package There is currently a review underway for the health technicians training package. This training package includes national qualifications for health technicians and is still in the preliminary stage of review.  Qualification Diploma of Paramedical Science (Anaesthesia) - Integrated Care Management New South Wales Diploma of Paramedical Science (Anaesthesia) - Southbank Institute of Technology Queensland The recognised minimum qualifications in Western Australia  Anesthesia Technicians in the  United States In the United States, the American Society of Anesthesia Technologists & Technicians (ASATT), acknowledges the scope of practice for the anaesthesia technical personnel. The commitment of ASATT is to ensure that efficient, safe, competent, and ethical practices are provided to society and maintaining professional standards of practice. ASATT acknowledges that the anaesthesia technical personnel are a part of the anaesthesia care team as listed in the practice guidelines of the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA).  Certified Anesthesia Technician For more details on this topic, see Certified Anesthesia Technician.  Certified Anesthesia Technologist For more details on this topic, see Certified Anesthesia Technologist.  Associate & Bachelors Programs Grossmont College  Milwaukee Area Technical College  North Seattle Community College - Online Renton Technical College  Sanford-Brown Institute - Houston  Sanford-Brown Institute - Iselin  Sanford-Brown Institute - Pittsburgh  Sanford-Brown College - St. Peters  Stony Brook University   See also Clinical officer anaesthetists  References