 Rationale Several ranges of food supplements are recognised: additives which repair a deficit to "normal" levels additives which appear to enhance a food supplements taken in addition to the normal diet Many physicians today disagree with the premise that foodstuffs need supplementation, but accept that - for example - added calcium may provide benefit, or that adding folic acid may correct a nutritional deficiency especially in pregnant women. On a more controversial level, but well founded in scientific basis, is the science of using foods and food supplements to achieve a defined health goal. A common example of this use of food supplements is the extent to which body builders will use amino acid mixtures, vitamins and phytochemicals to enhance natural hormone production, increase muscle and reduce fat. Moving on from this reasonably accepted usage, there is increasing evidence for the use of food supplements in established medical conditions. This nutritional supplementation using foods as medicine (nutraceuticals) has been effectively used in treating disorders affecting the immune system up to and including cancers. This goes beyond the definition of "food supplement", but should be included for the sake of completeness.  Food supplements There are several main groups of food supplements which can be considered: Vitamins and co-vitamins Essential minerals Essential fatty acids Essential amino acids Glyconutrients Phytonutrients Enzymes  Examples of fortified foods Iodised salt has been used in the United States since before World War II. Folic acid is added to flour in many industrialized countries, and has prevented a significant number of neural tube defects in infants. It is, however, not uniform in its application, with more intake of folic acid through fortified flour among those who were already receiving high amounts through their diet. Niacin has been added to bread in the USA since 1938 (when voluntary addition started), a programme which substantially reduced the incidence of pellagra. Vitamin D is added to a few foods (especially margarine). Fluoride salts are added to water and toothpastes to prevent tooth decay. Water fluoridation is a controversial topic in some segments of the general public, although less so amongst established scientific bodies. Calcium is frequently added to fruit juices, carbonated beverages and rice. "Golden rice" is a variety of rice which has been genetically modified to produce beta carotene. Amylase rich Flour is utilized for food making.|url=http://www.icddrb.org/publication.cfm?classificationID=46&pubID=6115  See also Food additive Dietary supplement Food processing Nutraceutical Nutrification (aka food enrichment or fortification)  References