 Origin The idea of a nutrition guideline in a pyramidal representation is probably a swedish invention by cooking book author Anna Britt Agnsäter, published by the swedish government in 1974.  Improved American Food Guide Pyramid by the United States Department of Agriculture The 1992 food guide pyramid diagram published by the United Stated Department of Agriculture. vv The current USDA food pyramid The nutritional guideline known as the food pyramid, and formally titled the Improved American Food Guide Pyramid, was originally drafted by Francesca Morris and was published by the FDB in Denmark in 1978 and later adopted by the USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) in 1992 to replace the earlier food groups classification system.  Groups based on the Food Guide Pyramid It has been suggested that this article or section be merged into MyPyramid. (Discuss)  Carbohydrate group Carbohydrates are a source of energy that can be transformed into glucose, the form of sugar that is transported and used by the body, more quickly than proteins or fats. A diet too high in carbohydrates can upset the delicate balance of a body's blood sugar level, resulting in fluctuations in energy and mood that leave one feeling irritated and tired. A diet too low in carbohydrates depletes the healthy glycogen (the storage form of glucose) stores in the muscles and liver.  Vegetable group A vegetable is a part of a plant consumed by humans that is generally savory but is not sweet. A vegetable is not considered a grain, fruit, nut, spice, or herb. For example, the stem, root, flower, etc., may be eaten as vegetables. Vegetables contain many vitamins and minerals; however, different vegetables contain different spreads, so it is important to eat a wide variety of types. For example, green vegetables typically contain vitamin A, dark orange and dark green vegetables contain vitamin C,and vegetables like broccoli and related plants contain iron and calcium. Vegetables are very low in fats and calories, but cooking can often add these. It is recommended that people consume 2-3 servings of vegetables in a day. They may be fresh, frozen, canned, or juiced.  Fruit group In terms of food (rather than botany), fruits are the sweet-tasting seed-bearing parts of plants, or occasionally sweet parts of plants which do not bear seeds. These include apples, oranges, plums, bananas, etc. Fruits are low in calories and fat and are a source of natural sugars, fiber and vitamins. Processing fruits when canning or making into juices unfortunately may add sugars and remove nutrients. The fruit food group is sometimes combined with the vegetable food group. Note that many foods considered fruits in botany because they bear seeds are not considered fruits in cuisine because they lack the characteristic sweet taste, e.g., tomatos or avocados. It is best to consume 2-4 servings of fruit in a day. They may be fresh, frozen, canned, dried, pureed or juiced.  Fat Group The food pyramid advises that fats be consumed sparingly. Butter and oils are examples of fats. Healthy sources of fat can be found in fish, nuts, and certain vegetables, such as avocados.  Dairy group Dairy products are produced from the milk of mammals, most usually but not exclusively cattle. They include milk, yogurt and cheese. Milk and its derivative products are a rich source of the mineral calcium, but also provide protein, phosphorus, vitamin A, and vitamin D. However, many dairy products are high in saturated fat and cholesterol compared to vegetables, fruits and whole grains, which is why skimmed products are available as an alternative. For adults, 3 cups of dairy products are recommended per day.  Protein group Meat is the tissue - usually muscle - of an animal consumed by humans. Since most parts of many animals are edible, there are a vast variety of meats. Meat is a major source of protein, as well as iron, zinc, and vitamin B12. Meats, poultry, and fish include beef, chicken, pork, salmon, tuna, and shrimp, eggs. The meat group is one of the major compacted food groups in the food guide pyramid. Many of the same nutrients found in meat can also be found in foods like eggs, dry beans, and nuts, such foods are typically placed in the same category as meats, as meat alternatives. These include tofu, products that resemble meat or fish but are made with soy, eggs, and cheeses. For those who do not consume meat or animal products (see Vegetarianism, veganism and Taboo food and drink), meat analogs, tofu, beans, lentils, chick peas, nuts and other high-protein vegetables are also included in this group. Although meats provide energy and nutrients, they are often high in fat and cholesterol, and can be high in sodium. Simply trimming off fatty tissue can go a long way towards reducing this negative effect. The food guide pyramid suggests that adults eat 2-3 servings per day. One serving of meat is 4oz, about the size of a deck of cards.  Controversy It has been suggested that this article or section be merged into MyPyramid. (Discuss) Before the dietary pyramid that most of people have become familiar with was invented, the USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) published the first list of dietary recommendations. In 1916, the first food guide was published and named "food for young children". In 1943 the "basic seven" guidelines that President Franklin Roosevelt introduced was deemed obsolete because of its complexity and was replaced by the much more simple "basic four". This consists of milk, meats, breads, and fruits & vegetables. In the 1970s, there was a fifth group added, fats, sugars, and alcohol. People were advised to only have this on a restricted basis though. Then in 1994, after careful consideration of all of the different dietary factors, the USDA released the commonly known food pyramid that consists of four levels with different types of food on each level. However, a recent change has been made to dietary suggestions yet again by editing the food pyramid released in 1994. Many nutritional experts, like Harvard nutritionist Dr. Walter Willett, believe the 1992 pyramid does not reflect the latest research on dietetics. Certain dietary choices that have been linked to heart disease, such as three cups of whole milk and an 8 oz. serving of hamburger daily, were technically permitted under the pyramid. The pyramid also lacked differentiation within the protein-rich group ("Meat, Poultry, Fish, Dry Beans, Eggs, and Nuts"). Some of the recommended quantities for the different types of food in the old pyramid have also come under criticism for lack of clarity. For instance, the pyramid recommends two to three servings from the protein-rich group, but this is intended to be a maximum. The pyramid recommends two to four fruit servings, but this is intended to be the minimum. The fats group as a whole have been put at the tip of the pyramid, under the direction to eat as little as possible, which is largely problematic. Under the guide, one would assume to avoid fats and fatty foods, which can lead to health problems. For one, fat is essential in a person's general sustainability. Unsaturated fats from a natural source can actually aid in weight loss, reduce heart disease risk, lower blood sugar, and even lower cholesterol. These fats can be found in olive oil, nuts, pesto, seafood (including fish, shrimp, squid, and krill among many more) and avocados. Also, they are very long sustaining, and help keep blood sugar at a steady level. On top of that, these fats help brain function as well. There are claims that the USDA was (and continues to be) unduly influenced by political pressure exerted by food production associations. Food industries, such as milk companies, have been accused of influencing the United States Department of Agriculture into making the colored spots on the newly created food pyramid larger for their particular product. The milk section is clearly the easiest to see out of the six sections of the pyramid. This makes individuals believe that more milk should be consumed on a daily basis compared to the others. Furthermore, the inclusion of milk as a group unto itself implies that is an essential part of a healthy diet, despite the many people who are lactose intolerant and choose to abstain from dairy, and a number of cultures that have historically consumed little if any dairy products with the exception of breast-feeding.  Four Food Groups From 1956 until 1992 the United States Department of Agriculture recommended its Basic Four Food Groups. The government's Basic Four involved (1) meats, poultry, fish, dry beans and peas, eggs, and nuts; (2) dairy products, such as milk, cheese, and yogurt; (3) grains and wheat products (4) fruits and vegetables. This was omnipresent in nutrition education in the United States. In 1992 it was replaced by the Food Pyramid.  Alternatives The Harvard School of Public Health proposes the Healthy eating pyramid, which includes calcium and multi-vitamin supplements as well as moderate amounts of alcohol, as an alternative to the Food Guide Pyramid. Vegan version of the nutritional food pyramid. Many observers believe that the Harvard pyramid follows the results of nutrition studies published in peer reviewed scientific journals more closely. In their book "Fantastic Voyage - Live Long Enough To Live Forever" published in 2004, Ray Kurzweil and Terry Grossman M.D., point out that the guidelines provided in the Harvard Pyramid, fail to distinguish between healthy and unhealthy oils. In addition, whole-grain foods are given more priority than vegetables, which should not be the case as vegetables have a lower glycemic load. Other observations are that fish should be given a higher priority due to its high omega-3 content, and that high fat dairy products should be excluded. As an alternative, the authors postulate a new food pyramid, emphasising low glycemic load vegetables, healthy fats, such as avocados, nuts and seeds, lean animal protein, fish, and extra virgin olive oil. The University of Michigan Integrative Medicine’s Healing Foods Pyramid emphasizes plant-based choices, variety and balance. It includes sections for seasonings and water as well as healthy fats.  See also Food portal MyPyramid The Food Balance Wheel alternate interpretation of the Food Guide Pyramid Vegetarian Diet Pyramid  References