 Essential chemical elements Some sources state that sixteen chemical elements are required to support human biochemical processes by serving structural and functional roles as well as electrolytes: Most of the dietary elements are of relatively low atomic weight: Periodic table highlighting dietary elements H   He Li Be   B C N O F Ne Na Mg   Al Si P S Cl Ar K Ca Sc   Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr Rb Sr Y   Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I Xe Cs Ba La * Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn Fr Ra Ac ** Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt Ds Rg     * Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu   ** Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No Lr The four organic basic elements Quantity elements Essential trace elements Pervasive but no identified biological function in humans The following play important roles in biological processes: Dietary element RDA/AI Description Category Insufficiency Excess Potassium 4700 mg Quantity is a systemic electrolyte and is essential in coregulating ATP with sodium. Dietary sources include legumes, potato skin, tomatoes, and bananas. hypokalemia hyperkalemia Chlorine 2300 mg Quantity is needed for production of hydrochloric acid in the stomach and in cellular pump functions. Table salt (sodium chloride) is the main dietary source. hypochloremia hyperchloremia Sodium 1500 mg Quantity is a systemic electrolyte and is essential in coregulating ATP with potassium. Dietary sources include table salt (sodium chloride, the main source), sea vegetables, milk, and spinach. hyponatremia hypernatremia Calcium 1000 mg Quantity is needed for muscle, heart and digestive system health, builds bone, supports synthesis and function of blood cells. Dietary sources of calcium include dairy products, canned fish with bones (salmon, sardines), green leafy vegetables, nuts and seeds. hypocalcaemia hypercalcaemia Phosphorus 700 mg Quantity is a component of bones (see apatite), cells, in energy processing and many other functions. In biological contexts, usually seen as phosphate. hypophosphatemia hyperphosphatemia Magnesium 420 mg Quantity is required for processing ATP and for bones. Dietary sources include nuts, soy beans, and cocoa mass. hypomagnesemia, magnesium deficiency hypermagnesemia Zinc 11 mg Trace is pervasive and required for several enzymes such as carboxypeptidase, liver alcohol dehydrogenase, and carbonic anhydrase. zinc deficiency zinc toxicity Iron 8 mg Trace is required for many proteins and enzymes, notably hemoglobin to prevent anemia. Dietary sources include red meat, leafy green vegetables, fish (tuna, salmon), eggs, dried fruits, beans, whole grains, and enriched grains. anaemia iron overload disorder Manganese 2.3 mg Trace is a cofactor in enzyme functions. manganese deficiency manganism Copper 900 Âµg Trace is required component of many redox enzymes, including cytochrome c oxidase. copper deficiency copper toxicity Iodine 150 Âµg Trace is required not only for the synthesis of thyroid hormones, thyroxine and triiodothyronine and to prevent goiter, but also, probably as an antioxidant, for extrathyroidal organs as mammary and salivary glands and for gastric mucosa and immune system (thymus): Iodine in biology iodine deficiency iodism Selenium 55 Âµg Trace a cofactor essential to activity of antioxidant enzymes like glutathione peroxidase. selenium deficiency selenosis Molybdenum 45 Âµg Trace the oxidases xanthine oxidase, aldehyde oxidase, and sulfite oxidase molybdenum deficiency  Other elements Many elements have been suggested as essential, but such claims have usually not been confirmed. Definitive evidence for efficacy comes from the characterization of a biomolecule containing the element with an identifiable and testable function. One problem with identifying efficacy is that some elements are innocuous at low concentrations and are pervasive, so proof of efficacy is lacking because deficiencies are difficult to reproduce. Element Description Excess Sulfur Relatively large quantities of sulfur are required, but there is no RDA, as the sulfur is obtained from and used for amino acids, and therefore should be adequate in any diet containing enough protein. (primarily associated with compounds) Cobalt Cobalt is required in the synthesis of vitamin B12, but because bacteria are required to synthesize the vitamin, it is usually considered part of vitamin B12 deficiency rather than its own dietary element deficiency. Cobalt poisoning Nickel There have been occasional studies asserting the essentiality of nickel, but it currently has no known RDA. Nickel toxicity Chromium Chromium is sometimes described as essential. It is implicated in sugar metabolism in humans, leading to a market for the supplement chromium picolinate, but definitive biochemical evidence for a physiological function is lacking. Chromium toxicity Fluorine Fluorine (as fluoride) has been described as conditionally essential, depending upon the importance placed upon the prevention of chronic disease. Fluoride poisoning Boron Boron has been found to be essential for the utilization of vitamin D and calcium in the body. Strontium Strontium has been found to be involved in the utilization of calcium in the body. It has promoting action on calcium uptake into bone at moderate dietary strontium levels, but the rachitogenic action at higher dietary levels. Rachitogenic Other Arsenic, bromine, cadmium, silicon, tungsten, and vanadium have established, albeit specialized, biochemical roles as structural or functional cofactors in other organisms. These elements appear not to be utilized by humans. Multiple  See also Food portal Macronutrient Essential nutrient Micronutrient deficiency Health food Biochemic cell salts  External links Metals in Nutrition  References