 Nootropic vs. cognitive enhancer This section needs attention from an expert on the subject. See the talk page for details. WikiProject Pharmacology or the Pharmacology Portal may be able to help recruit an expert. (February 2010) A nootropic is a cognitive enhancer that is neuroprotective or extremely nontoxic. Note: Do not confuse the cognitive enhancer with nootropic. Nootropics are by definition cognitive enhancers, but a cognitive enhancer is not necessarily a nootropic. A cognitive enhancer is a substance that enhances concentration and memory. The first synthetic cognition enhancers to see widespread use were the amphetamines. The word "nootropic" has been abused by researchers who wish to promote a certain drug as side-effect free. The word was first coined by Corneliu E. Giurgea in 1972. He stated that nootropic drugs should: Enhance learning and memory Enhance the resistance of learned behaviors or memories to conditions that tend to disrupt them (e.g., electroconvulsive shock, hypoxia) Protect the brain against various physical or chemical injuries (e.g., barbiturates, scopalamine) Increase the efficacy of the tonic cortical/subcortical control mechanisms Lack the usual pharmacology of other psychotropic drugs (e.g., sedation, motor stimulation), and possess very few side effects and extremely low toxicity Note: section 5. of Giurgea's original definition has been gradually dropped by most researchers.  Availability and prevalence At present, there are several drugs on the market that improve memory, concentration, planning, and reduce impulsive behavior. Many more are in different stages of development. The most commonly used class of drug is stimulants. These drugs are used primarily to treat people with cognitive difficulties such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and ADHD. However, more widespread use is being recommended by some researchers. These drugs have a variety of human enhancement applications as well, and are marketed heavily on the internet. Nevertheless, intense marketing may not correlate with efficacy; while scientific studies support some of the claimed benefits, it is worth noting that many of the claims attributed to most nootropics have not been formally tested. In academia, modafinil has been used to increase productivity, although its long-term effects have not been assessed in healthy individuals. Stimulants such as methylphenidate are being used on college campuses, and by an increasingly younger group. One survey found that 7% of students had used stimulants for a cognitive edge in the past year, and on some campuses the number is as high as 25%.  Hazards The main concern with pharmaceutical drugs is adverse effects, and these concerns apply to cognitive-enhancing drugs as well. Cognitive enhancers are often taken for the long-term when little data is available. Dr. Corneliu E. Giurgea originally coined the word nootropics for brain-enhancing drugs with very few side effects. Racetams are sometimes cited as an example of a nootropic with few effects and wide therapeutic window; however, any substance ingested could produce harmful effects. An unapproved drug or dietary supplement does not have to have safety or efficacy approval before being sold. (This mainly applies to the USA, but may not apply in the EU or elsewhere.)  Examples The term "drug" here is used as a legal designation. Although some of the effects of these substances may be similar to others, only those substances that have shown cognitive effects are included.  Vitamins and Supplements This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please improve this section if you can. The talk page may contain suggestions. (July 2010) B Vitamins—may influence cognitive function through an effect on methylation and homocysteine levels, as excess homocysteine has been associated with cognitive impairment and the B vitamins work to reduce homocysteine However, although epidemiological evidence shows an association, two studies did not find B vitamin supplementation improves cognitive function, and another that found an association was criticized. A systematic review of trials found "little evidence of a beneficial impact" from supplements on cognitive function later in life. Omega-3—linked to the maintenance brain function. A study done in Norway, demonstrated a potential link between Omega-3 consumption during pregnancy and child intelligence test scores. Isoflavones—may be related to cognitive function  Racetams The word nootropic was coined upon discovery of the effects of piracetam, developed in the 1960s. Although piracetam is the most commonly taken nootropic, there are many relatives in the family that have different potencies and side effects. Other common racetams include pramiracetam, oxiracetam, and aniracetam. There is no generally-accepted mechanism for racetams. In general, they show no affinity for the most important receptors, although modulation of most important central neurotransmitters, including acetylcholine and glutamate, have been reported. Although aniracetam and nebracetam show affinity for muscarinic receptors, only nefiracetam shows it at the nanomolar range. Racetams have been called "pharmacologically safe" drugs. Other substances sometimes classified as nootropics include hydergine, vinpocetine, bifemelane, huperzine A (cholinergic activator below), and dimethylaminoethanol (DMAE).  Stimulants Stimulants are often seen as smart drugs, but may be more accurately termed productivity enhancers. Some stimulants can enhance cognition and memory in some people, but cause psychosis in others. They generally have a very substantial side-effect profile and are not considered classical "nootropic" drugs. These typically improve concentration and a few areas of cognitive performance, but only while the drug is still in the blood. Some scientists recommend widespread use of stimulants such as methylphenidate and amphetamines by the general population to increase brain power. Amphetamines Amphetamine (Adderall, Dexedrine)—adrenergic, dopaminergic Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse)—adrenergic, dopaminergic (Note that amphetamines have high potential to act as neurotoxins to dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons, particularly after chronic use. Therefore, their effectiveness as nootropics are highly limited.) Adrenergics Atomoxetine—norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; approved for ADHD Reboxetine—Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; approved in Europe for clinical depression but may also be used off-label to treat ADHD Synephrine (found in Bitter orange)—agonist at α1 adrenergic receptors Cholinergics Arecoline Nicotine Eugeroics ("Wakefulness Enhancers")—unproven primary mechanisms but proven efficacy Adrafinil Armodafinil Modafinil Xanthines—reduces fatigue perception Caffeine—shown to increase alertness, performance and in some studies memory. Children and adults who consume low doses of caffeine showed increase alertness, yet a higher dose was needed to improve performance. Caffeine has also been shown to have more of an effect on improving cognitive performance and sustaining attention in older adults. Chronic pretreatment of caffeine in animals has shown to reduce ischaemic brain damage, in addition to reducing the risk of Parkinson’s disease. Paraxanthine Theobromine Theophylline  Dopaminergics Dopaminergics are substances that affect the neurotransmitter dopamine or the components of the nervous system that use dopamine. Attributable effects of dopamine are enhancement of attention, alertness, and antioxidant activity. Dopamine is the primary activity of stimulants like methylphenidate (Ritalin) or amphetamine. Dopaminergic nootropics include dopamine synthesis precursors, dopamine reuptake inhibitors, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and other compounds: Metabolic precursors—raise levels L-Phenylalanine—purported cognitive improvement L-Tyrosine (or N-Acetyl-L-Tyrosine, more bioavailable form)—purported cognitive improvement L-DOPA (L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine)—precursor to catecholamines (dopamine); neurotoxic effects documented Biopterin—a rare vitamin (coenzyme) that is synthesized in the pineal gland & crucial to the biosynthesis of dopamine Pyridoxal-phosphate (or PLP, pyridoxal-5'-phosphate, P5P, active form of Vitamin B6)—plays a role in the conversion of L-DOPA into dopamine (via the enzyme aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase) Reuptake inhibitors—stabilize/improve levels Amineptine—mild stimulant Methylphenidate—stimulant approved for ADHD; strong DAT inhibiton Bupropion—atypical antidepressant; moderate DAT inhibiton MAO-B inhibitors—prevent breakdown Selegiline—Mild stimulant; irreversible Rasagiline—Mild stimulant; irreversible Rhodiola Rosea—Adaptogenic herb; reversible Dopamine agonists Ropinirole—agonist at D2, D3, and D4 receptors Pramipexole—agonist at D2, D3 and D4 receptors Others Mucuna pruriens (Velvet Bean)—natural source of L-DOPA Modafinil—purported dopaminergic activity Citicoline (INN) (aka: cytidine diphosphate-choline (CDP-Choline) & cytidine 5'-diphosphocholine)—studies suggest CDP-choline supplements increase dopamine receptor densities, and suggest that CDP-choline supplementation can ameliorate memory impairment caused by environmental conditions. Preliminary research has found that citicoline supplements help improve focus and mental energy and may possibly be useful in the treatment of attention deficit disorder.  Memory enhancement Memory can come from many different processes, but is dependent on the ability to store and recall information.  Cholinergics Cholinergics are substances that affect the neurotransmitter acetylcholine or the components of the nervous system that use acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is a facilitator of memory formation. Increasing the availability of this neurotransmitter in the brain may improve these functions. Cholinergic nootropics include acetylcholine precursors and cofactors, and acetylcholinesterase inhibitors: Precursors Choline—precursor of acetylcholine and phosphatidylcholine DMAE—precursor of acetylcholine Meclofenoxate—probable precursor of acetylcholine, approved for Dementia and Alzheimer's Alpha-GPC—thought to be the only cholinergic that delivers choline to the brain across the Blood-brain barrier; sold under its chemical name Cofactors Acetylcarnitine—amino acid that functions in acetylcholine production by donating the acetyl portion to the acetylcholine molecule Vitamin B5—cofactor in the conversion of choline into acetylcholine Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors Galantamine Lycoris radiata (Red Spider Lily)—natural source for galantamine Huperzine A—also shown to act as an NMDA antagonist and appears to increase nerve growth factor levels in rats Donepezil Rosemary Sage Reuptake inhibitors and enchancers Coluracetam—choline uptake enhancer Agonists Ispronicline Nicotine Arecoline  GABA blockers The GABAA α5 receptor site has recently displayed memory improvements when inverse agonized. α5IA—α5 inverse agonist Suritozole—α5 partial inverse agonist  Glutamate activators The AMPA transmitter and the AMPA receptors are currently being researched, and there are signs that significant memory improvement and possible alertness enhancement may occur when agonized. The drug class for AMPA system modulation is called Ampakines. Although there are many Ampakines currently in-research, those mentioned here are significantly notable, and/or show reasonable signs of coming to market. Some racetams have shown this activity, such as aniracetam CX-717—pending FDA approval for memory-impairing illnesses IDRA-21—believed to improve memory by significantly enhancing long-term potentiation but used only in animals; incredibly potent LY-503,430—under development for Parkinson's but showing increase in BDNF, specifically in areas of memory and higher cognitive skills  cAMP Cyclic adenosine monophosphate is a secondary messenger that, if increased, has shown memory improvements. One common method is by decreasing the activity of phosphodiesterase-4, an enzyme that breaks down cAMP. Typical effects include wakefulness and memory enhancement. Propentofylline—nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitor with some neuroenhancement Rolipram—PDE4 inhibitor, shows alertness enhancement, long term memory improvement and neuroprotection Mesembrine—PDE4-inhibitor with possible serotonergic activity  Other α2A receptors are concentrated heavily in the prefrontal cortex and the locus coeruleus, with the potential to improve attention abilities via modulating post-synaptic α2A receptors in the prefrontal cortex. Guanfacine is an α2A receptor agonist, FDA approved for and frequently used to treat ADHD symptoms. Studies have shown guanfacine to strengthen working memory, reduce distractibility, improve response inhibition, increase regional cerebral blood flow, reduce locomotor hyperactivity, and improve attentional control in animal models, as well as enhance memory function in humans.  Serotonergics Serotonin is a neurotransmitter with various effects on mood and possible effects on neurogenesis. Serotonergics are substances that affect the neurotransmitter serotonin or the components of the nervous system that use serotonin. Serotonergic nootropics include serotonin precursors and cofactors, and serotonin reuptake inhibitors: Precursors 5-HTP—precursor (intermediate between tryptophan and serotonin) Tryptophan—essential amino acid precursor Cofactors Pyridoxal-phosphate (or PLP, pyridoxal-5'-phosphate, P5P, active form of Vitamin B6)—plays role in conversion of 5-HTP into serotonin (via the enzyme aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase). Reuptake inhibitors SSRIs—class of antidepressants that increase active serotonin levels by inhibiting reuptake, also shown to promote Neurogenesis in the hippocampus Sceletium tortuosum—active constituent mesembrine shown to act as a potent SSRI and PDE4 inhibitor Hypericum perforatum—inhibits reuptake of serotonin (as well as Norepinephrine, Dopamine, GABA and Glutamate) via activation of TRPC6 MAO-A inhibitors Resveratrol Berberine Coptisine Curcumin Piperine Harmal Rhodiola rosea Reuptake enhancers Tianeptine—paradoxical antidepressant, improves mood and reduces anxiety  Anti-depression, adaptogenic (antistress), and mood stabilization Stress, depression, and depressed mood negatively affect cognitive performance. It is reasoned that counteracting and preventing depression and stress may be an effective nootropic strategy. The term adaptogen applies to most herbal anti-stress claims. The substances below may not have been mentioned earlier on the page: Beta blockers—reduce somatic symptoms of anxiety Lemon Balm—displays adaptogen properties; also shown to possess GABA transaminase inhibitor properties Passion Flower—possible MAOI and neurotransmitter reuptake activity Rhodiola Rosea—adaptogen; possible MAOI activity  St John's Wort—herbal SSRI approved (in Europe) to treat mild depression Ginseng (including Siberian ginseng)—adaptogenic effects shown Sutherlandia frutescens—possible anti-inflammatory, reducing pain from those illnesses Kava—anxiolytic herb Tea—contains many different adaptogens Theanine—GABAergic activity producing relaxation, also increases brain serotonin and dopamine levels Grape seed extract—has shown some efficacy in reducing bodily stress Adafenoxate—possible anxiolytic effect Valerian—possible anxiolytic effect through agonism at GABA-A receptors Butea frondosa—possible anxiolytic effect Gotu Kola—adaptogen and anxiolytic Foti—adaptogen; possible MAOI activity Berberine—alkaloid, found in various herbs, with antidepressant properties; acts as a sigma receptor agonist; also shown to act as a mild tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitor Many Chinese herbs such as Panax ginseng, Polygala tenuifolia, Acorus gramineus and Huperzia serrata. Bacopa monnieri  Blood flow and metabolic function Brain function is dependent on many basic processes such as the usage of ATP, removal of waste, and intake of new materials. Improving blood flow or altering these processes can benefit brain function. The list below contains only vasodilators that have shown at least probable mental enhancement. Blessed Thistle—increases blood circulation, improving memory Coenzyme q-10—antioxidant; increases oxygen usage by mitochondria Creatine—protects ATP during transport Lipoic acid—improves oxygen usage and antioxidant recycling, possibly improving memory Pyritinol—Drug similar to B vitamin Pyridoxine Marijuana— Studies show an increase in blood flow to the cerebellum. Picamilon—GABA activity and blood flow improver Ginkgo biloba—vasodilator also shown to act as a negative allosteric modulator of GABA-A receptors, and as an antagonist at GABAA-rho receptors (formerly known as GABA-C receptors) Vinpocetine—increases blood circulation (vasodilator) and metabolism in the brain; also shown to inhibit voltage-sensitive Na+ channels—however, through a similar mechanism to reserpine, Vinpocetine may temporarily deplete the monoamines serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine by inhibiting VMAT, thus preventing them from reaching the synapse. Vinpocetine may therefore induce or exasperate depressive symptoms as an adverse effect.  Nerve growth stimulation and brain cell protection Nerves are necessary to the foundation of brain communication and their degeneracy, underperformance, or lacking can have disastrous results on brain functions. Antioxidants may prevent oxidative stress and cell death, therefore exerting a neuroprotective effect. Idebenone—antioxidant Melatonin—antioxidant Glutathione—chief antioxidant Acetylcarnitine (Acetyl-L-Carnitine Arginate or Hydrochloride) neuroprotective Inositol—implicated in memory function, deficit linked to some psychiatric illnesses—has been shown particularly efficacious in OCD patients Anticonvulsants—inhibit seizure related brain malfunction if a person has seizures Phosphatidylserine—possible membrane stabilizer Lion's Mane Mushroom—Stimulated myelination in an in vitro experiment and stimulated nerve growth factor in an in vitro experiment with human astrocytoma cells. Also improved cognitive ability, in a double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled trial. SAM-e (S-Adenosyl methionine)—crucial for cellular regeneration (fuels DNA methylation), also involved with the biosynthesis of dopamine & serotonin Acetylcysteine (L-cysteine)—precursor to antioxidant glutathione Apoaequorin (Calcium-binding protein) (CaBP)—(Prevagen®) neuroprotective (note that orally ingested proteins are not generally bioavailable and are thus unlikely have any effect) Uncaria tomentosa (Cat's Claw)—in an in vitro experiment with rats, Cat's Claw (PTI-00703™), inhibited formation of brain beta amyloid deposits (Dopamine enhancers)—dopamine is an antioxidant that can enhance dendrite extension  Direct hormones These are hormones that have activity not necessarily attributable to another specific chemical interaction, but have shown effectiveness. Only specific nootropic effects are stated. Vasopressin—memory hormone that improves both memory encoding and recall Pregnenolone—increases neurogenesis Orexin—Significant wakefulness promoter  Secondary enhancers These are substances that by themselves may not improve brain function, but may have benefits for those who lack them (in the case of hormones) or may alter the balance of neurotransmitters. DHEA—precursor to estrogen and testosterone  Unknown enhancement Other agents purported to have nootropic effects but do not (yet) have attributable mechanisms or clinically significant effects (but may upon refinement of administration) are listed below. Nootropics with proven or purported benefits: Bacopa monniera—shown to possess adaptogenic properties, enhance memory and concentration Folk use in Ayurvedic medicine purports "enhancement of curiosity". Brahmi rasayana—improved learning and memory in mice Fipexide—drug for Dementia Gerovital H3—famous alleged anti-aging mixture, most effects disproven but some mind enhancement shown Sulbutiamine—fat soluble vitamin B1 derivative—caused mice to perform better on operant conditioning tests and object recognition tests Royal Jelly—Increases brain cell growth and diversity, only proven in-vitro, improbable in-vivo Curcumin—significant in-vitro activity, but in-vivo activity limited by low bioavailability  Other nootropics These substances have been linked to better cognitive function, but may not be the cause. See correlation does not imply causation Alcohol—moderate drinkers tend to have better cognitive function than abstainers or heavy drinkers  See also This "see also" section may contain an excessive number of suggestions. Please ensure that only the most relevant suggestions are given and that they are not red links, and consider integrating suggestions into the article itself. (November 2010)  Brain and neurology Aging and memory Human brain Long-term potentiation  Areas of potential improvement from nootropic drugs Attention Attitude Cognition Cognitive science Eidetic memory Learning Memory Memory-prediction framework Motivation Recollection (recall)  Health Anxiety Cognitive psychology Drug Human enhancement Ergogenic aid Stress management  Cognitive enhancement without drugs or supplements Working memory training IQ Changeability  References