 Components of physical fitness A personal trainer performing fitness exercises. The President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports—a study group sponsored by the government of the United States—declines to offer a simple definition of physical fitness. Instead, it developed the following chart: Physiology Health related Skill related Sports Metabolic Morphological Bone integrity Other Body composition Cardiovascular fitness Flexibility Muscular endurance Muscle strength Agility Balance Coordination Power Speed Reaction time Other Team sport Individual sport Lifetime Other Accordingly, a general-purpose physical fitness program must address the following essentials: Cardiovascular endurance Flexibility score Strength training Muscular endurance|stamina Body composition General skill training However, along with these essential components, a comprehensive fitness program that is tailored to an individual will probably focus on one or more specific skills, and on age- or health-related needs such as bone health. Many sources also cite mental, social and emotional health as an important part of overall fitness. This is often presented in textbooks as a triangle made up of three points, which represent physical, emotional, and mental fitness. Physical fitness can also prevent or treat many chronic health conditions brought on by unhealthy lifestyle or aging. Working out can also help people sleep better. To stay healthy it's important to participate in physical activity.  Specific fitness Specific or task-oriented fitness is a person's ability to perform in a specific activity with a reasonable efficiency: for example, sports or military service. Specific training prepares athletes to perform well in their sports. Examples are: 400 m sprint: in a sprint the athlete must be trained to work anaerobically throughout the race. Marathon: in this case the athlete must be trained to work aerobically and their endurance must be built-up to a maximum. Many fire fighters and police officers undergo regular fitness testing to determine if they are capable of the physically demanding tasks required of the job. Members of the United States Army and Army National Guard must be able to pass the Army Physical Fitness Test (APFT).  See also Bodybuilding CrossFit CPR Exergaming Flexibility Score Harvard Step Test Health club National Academy of Sports Medicine Neutral spine Obesity Personal Trainer Physical exercise Physical fitness test VO2 max and joe mamma  References