 Signs and symptoms Signs and symptoms of rickets include: Bone pain or tenderness dental problems muscle weakness (rickety myopathy or "floppy baby syndrome" or "slinky baby" (where the baby is floppy or slinky-like) increased tendency for fractures (easily broken bones), especially greenstick fractures Skeletal deformity Toddlers: Bowed legs (genu varum) Older children: Knock-knees (genu valgum) or "windswept knees" Cranial, spinal, and pelvic deformities Growth disturbance Hypocalcemia (low level of calcium in the blood), and Tetany (uncontrolled muscle spasms all over the body). Craniotabes (soft skull) Costochondral swelling (aka "rickety rosary" or "rachitic rosary") Harrison's groove Double malleoli sign due to metaphyseal hyperplasia Widening of wrist raises early suspicion, it is due to metaphysial cartilage hyperplasia. An X-ray or radiograph of an advanced sufferer from rickets tends to present in a classic way: bow legs (outward curve of long bone of the legs) and a deformed chest. Changes in the skull also occur causing a distinctive "square headed" appearance. These deformities persist into adult life if not treated. Long-term consequences include permanent bends or disfiguration of the long bones, and a curved back. Overactive Vomiting  Types Nutritional Rickets Vitamin D Resistant Rickets Vitamin D Dependant Rickets Type I Type II Congenital Rickets  Cause The primary cause of rickets is a vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D is required for proper calcium absorption from the gut. Sunlight, especially ultraviolet light, lets human skin cells convert Vitamin D from an inactive to active state. In the absence of vitamin D, dietary calcium is not properly absorbed, resulting in hypocalcaemia, leading to skeletal and dental deformities and neuromuscular symptoms, e.g. hyperexcitability. Foods that contain vitamin D include butter, eggs, fish liver oils, margarine, fortified milk and juice, and oily fishes such as tuna, herring, and salmon. A rare X-linked dominant form exists called Vitamin D resistant rickets. Cases have been reported in Britain in recent years of rickets in children of many social backgrounds caused by inability to make vitamin D because the sun's ultravoilet light was not reaching the skin because of persistent use of strong sunblock, or too much "covering up" in sunlight, or spending too much time indoors; the British Medical Journal reported in 2010 that doctors in Newcastle on Tyne saw 20 cases of rickets per year.  Diagnosis Rickets may be diagnosed with the help of: Blood tests: Serum calcium may show low levels of calcium, serum phosphorus may be low, and serum alkaline phosphatase may be high. Arterial blood gases may reveal metabolic acidosis X-rays of affected bones may show loss of calcium from bones or changes in the shape or structure of the bones. Bone biopsy is rarely performed but will confirm rickets.  Treatment and prevention The treatment and prevention of rickets is known as antirachitic.  Diet and sunlight Cholecalciferol (D3) Ergocalciferol (D2) Treatment involves increasing dietary intake of calcium, phosphates and vitamin D. Exposure to ultraviolet B light (sunshine when the sun is highest in the sky), cod liver oil, halibut-liver oil, and viosterol are all sources of vitamin D. A sufficient amount of ultraviolet B light in sunlight each day and adequate supplies of calcium and phosphorus in the diet can prevent rickets. Darker-skinned babies need to be exposed longer to the ultraviolet rays. The replacement of vitamin D has been proven to correct rickets using these methods of ultraviolet light therapy and medicine. Recommendations are for 400 international units (IU) of vitamin D a day for infants and children. Children who do not get adequate amounts of vitamin D are at increased risk of rickets. Vitamin D is essential for allowing the body to uptake calcium for use in proper bone calcification and maintenance.  Supplementation Sufficient vitamin D levels can also be achieved through dietary supplementation and/or exposure to sunlight. Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) is the preferred form since it is more readily absorbed than vitamin D2. Most dermatologists recommend vitamin D supplementation as an alternative to unprotected ultraviolet exposure due to the increased risk of skin cancer associated with sun exposure. Endogenous production with full body exposure to sunlight is approximately 250 Âµg (10,000 IU) per day.  According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), infants who are breast-fed may not get enough vitamin D from breast milk alone. For this reason, the AAP recommends that infants who are exclusively breast-fed receive daily supplements of vitamin D from age 2 months until they start drinking at least 17 ounces of vitamin D-fortified milk or formula a day.  Epidemiology In developed countries, rickets is a rare disease (incidence of less than 1 in 200,000). Those at higher risk for developing rickets include: Breast-fed infants whose mothers are not exposed to sunlight Breast-fed infants who are not exposed to sunlight Babies with dark complexions (e.g. brown skin, South African), particularly when breastfed and exposed to little sunlight Individuals not consuming milk, such as those who are lactose intolerant Individuals with red hair have been speculated to have a decreased risk for rickets due to their greater production of vitamin D in sunlight. Children ages 6 months to 24 months are at highest risk, because their bones are rapidly growing. Long-term consequences include permanent bends or disfiguration of the long bones, and a curved back.  References