 Isomers Lutein and zeaxanthin have identical chemical formulas and are isomers, but they are not stereoisomers. The only difference between them is in the location of the double bond in one of the end rings. This difference gives lutein three chiral centers whereas zeaxanthin has two. Because of symmetry, the (3R,3'S) and (3S,3'R) stereoisomers of zeaxanthin are identical. Therefore, zeaxanthin has only three stereoisomeric forms. The (3R,3'S) stereoisomer is called meso-zeaxanthin. The principal natural form of zeaxanthin is (3R,3'R)-zeaxanthin. The macula mainly contains the (3R,3'R)- and meso-zeaxanthin forms, but it also contains much smaller amounts of the third (3S,3'S) form.  Relationship with diseases of the eye Several observational studies have connected high dietary intake of foods providing zeaxanthin with lower incidence of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), most notably the Age-Related Eye Disease study (AREDS). There is currently insufficient evidence to assess the effectiveness of dietary or supplemental antioxidants in treatment or primary prevention of AMD, or the formation or progression of cataracts. Any benefit is more likely to be apparent in subpopulations of individuals exposed to high oxidative stress, such as heavy smokers or those with poor nutrition. In 2005, the US Food and Drug Administration rejected a Qualified Health Claims application by Xangold, citing insufficient evidence supporting the use of a zeaxanthin-containing supplement in prevention of AMD.  Natural occurrence Zeaxanthin is one of the most common carotenoid alcohols found in nature. It is the pigment that gives paprika (made from bell peppers), corn, saffron, and many other plants their characteristic color. Zeaxanthin breaks down to form picrocrocin and safranal, which are responsible for the taste and aroma of saffron. Foods considered good sources of lutein and zeaxanthin include eggs, spinach, goji berry, kale, turnip greens, collard greens, romaine lettuce, broccoli, zucchini, kiwifruit, corn, garden peas, swiss chard and Brussels sprouts.  External links Zeavision BioCyc Food Sources of Lutein + zeaxanthin  References